What does it mean to use a rational cost benefit analysis as the basis for crime
prevention policy? Explain one barrier to the implementation of rational cost benefit
analysis in the area of crime prevention.

What it means to use a rational cost benefit analysis as the basis for crime prevention policy is by making the cost of doing crime greater than the benefit of committing the crime. This is an important idea to consider because it puts more high risk on the table for the perpetrator. Some leaders and policy makers can make laws that are effective at stopping crime as well, using this as a basis. As stated in the book, “ The rational strategy of crime fighting is known as deterrence. The goal of deterrence is to make the costs of committing crimes far greater than any benefits potential criminals might derive from their acts” (Dye 107). The idea is to try and stop the crime by making the people feel like there are too many consequences involved, more stress for if the risk falls sour then what one is getting out of it. 

One barrier or issue to the implementation of rational cost benefit analysis in the area of crime prevention is that people that commit crimes tend to not think about the risk, they act on impulse. When a criminal commits an act, they aren't thinking about the risks, usually they go through with the act. Dye discusses this as it states, "Criminals do not weigh benefits against potential costs before committing the act” (Dye 114). This could be because they simply do not care about the law, and most likely committing other crimes as well.  This is because crime is seen as irrational and there is no full proof plan to prevent it. Because it's irrational, there is no rational policy that can stop it.


Social welfare programs are often associated with the federal government, but they also
illustrate the importance of state power in our system. Why do federally funded social
welfare programs vary from state to state? Use one program (either means tested or
non-means tested) as an example.

Federally funded social welfare programs vary from state to state because of the demographics of the people within the state and their needs, as well as the wants of the policies by the majority of the people in the state, due to the need of delegation. A great example of a reason a state would have different policies and eligibility for a federally funded social welfare program is the State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP). As stated by Dye, “The program is generally targeted toward families with incomes below 200 percent of the poverty level. But each state may set its own eligibility limits, and each state has flexibility in the administration of the program” (Dye 153). Each state has a different idea of poverty, due to how a household is financially doing compared to the rest of the state. So eligibility requirements may change via state due to the fact that what is considered poverty is different per state.  

Second of all, they do vary state by state because of the need to delegate the tasks in order to implement them more efficiently. If the federal government wants to implement a social welfare policy, and wants to implement it well, then they must comply with how each state would want to deal with it, especially because they could be forced by the federal government to do so. As Dye discusses unemployment compensation, he states, “In other words, the federal government threatens to undertake an unemployment compensation program and tax if the states do not do so themselves. This federal program succeeded in inducing all fifty states to establish such programs” (Dye 152). The states were just told that they had to have some kind of program for unemployment, it was more or less flexible for how each state gives money and eligibility requirements. 


(Note: this question is related to the reading on digital data privacy.) Faced with the
rapid spread of COVID-19, some public health officials suggest that we should trade
some of our privacy for improved contact tracing. Such contract tracing could allow the
government to monitor the location data of infected persons to better notify those with
whom they may have come in contact. Policy is most likely to change when there is an
equilibrium break (a societal shock that encourages policymakers to switch course). Do
you think that COVID-19 could be the equilibrium break that reduces privacy rights in
the name of safety? You can give any opinion, but you must explain yourself.

I think the only policies that will come out of COVID-19 are contingency plans and policies that will tell us what to do if there is an outbreak again, policies that give more structure for what to do if this happens, again. With that said, I believe that COVID-19 would reduce privacy rights because of two Major things, a lot of people will not want the government tracking them and that there is still a strong support to withhold the constitution. Lets begin with people not wanting to be tracked by the government. There is more to this than just a simple feeling of creepiness; if we relinquished our digital data privacy for this cause, what else could the government get away with? In accordance with Dye, as he touches upon the Patriot Act, he states, “Internet Tracking. Allows law enforcement authorities to track Internet communications, that is, to "surf the Web" without obtaining warrants” (Dye 356). This is the only form of internet tracking that we have in law currently. I personally feel that if we start overstepping the boundaries of criminal activity, we start to fall deeper into doing whatever the government wants. 

The second part of why I believe no substantial policy like that would manifest is because of the support to keep the constitution as a fundamental document that should not be changed. We would be referencing the 4th amendment here which is the ability that the government cannot search and seizure without a warrant. Since there is no arrest taking place because getting a disease is not a crime, then it should not be okay to track someone who isn't willing to be tracked if they haven't done anything wrong. As Dye states,, “With the tragedy of 9/11 fresh in their minds, most Americans approved of increased restrictive measures. But over time Americans became increasingly concerned with the losses of personal liberty inspired by the war on terrorism” (Dye 366). The more concern there is in the public, the more the policy wont get passed. There are alot of people who would want to withhold liberty no matter what situation they are in. 

Review the policy areas that we have discussed during the last month of class (after the
Modules 1 and 2 exam). Write a short op ed on a policy in one of those areas. Op ed is
short for opinion editorial. An opinion editorial is a published work that is similar in
format to a news story. It is usually written by an expert who is providing their
INFORMED opinion on a newsworthy topic. Here is an example: NJ, We Need to Pump Our Own Gas – Temporarily. You’re the expert now. Your op ed should state your
educated opinion. You might write an op ed titled Americans Won’t Know Math Until
We Get Rid of Common Core Or All Drugs Must Be Legalized to Reduce the Prison
Population. It’s up to you. Be creative and write about something that you’re interested
in (as long as we covered it in class).


Crime rates can lower with just two words: Legalizing Marijuana

Look, I get it, Marijuana is a drug and people shouldn't do drugs. But does it mean people should be incriminated for it? Before I get into the heated topic, I do want to say that I have never smoked so I am not an advocate for smoking it and won't be discussing it. I will, however, be discussing how ridiculous it is to have prisons filled with people who have not harmed anyone (besides potentially themselves) and are only going to jail for simple possession of a drug. And if you don't believe me when I say that this issue has gone out of hand, just listen to what Thomas Dye says about drug arrests in his book “Understand Public Policy”, “Drug arrests, relatively Low in the 1970s, have more than tripled in recent years. Arrests for drug offenses exceed those for any other crime” (Dye 127). Tripled. Drug arrests tripled after the war on drugs became more and more popular. And not only that, but the main people who are getting incarcerated are drug offenders since they are the biggest demographic in jail. We are putting people who do drugs in the same category as people who kill and rape, does that not seem wrong? If anything, drug offenders should have counseling to help them get back on track, especially if the drug has messed their life up. And also, we now are just copying prohibition in the 20’s with marijuana. Dye goes more into this as he states, “legalization of drugs and government control of their production and sale. Prohibition failed earlier in the twentieth century to end alcohol consumption, and crime, official corruption, and the enormous cost of futile efforts to stop individuals from drinking eventually forced the nation to end Prohibition” (Dye 128). People are going to smoke marijuana no matter what the consequences are, it's something recreational that they enjoy, just like drinking. And it all comes down to moderation as well. When it comes to marijuana, it is always presumed that the people who smoke it are addicted to it when that is not the case. But because the public believes it, then it provides a poor answer for why it should stay illegal. All in all, when it comes to crime prevention, we talk about raising the risks of doing the crime to outweigh the benefits of committing the crime when maybe we should be thinking about what should be classified as a crime to begin with. Instead of making it harder and harder to commit the crime if people keep doing it, then we should raise the ethical question of whether it should even be considered a crime at all. 
